You all ready? Yes. And start, if you'll start with
your name and the date you were born and where you
were born. I am Florencio Gutierrez. I was born in
Guerrero, Tamaulipas, Mexico in February 4th,
1899. Guerrero
lies two miles south of the old Zapata City, 60
miles south of Laredo. The history begins in 1910
when General Porfirio Diaz was president of
Mexico. The history of the revolution begins
then. At which time he had completed about 30 years
of government. In 1910, Mexico celebrated the
centenary. And soon afterward, a man named
Francisco Madero from
Parra, Coahuila, started a movement to change the
government in Mexico.
After a
Well, there was a period of time when Díaz was
fighting back, wasn't there?
Francisco
Madero started the political movement, and he was
arrested by the Porfirio Diaz government was
released, and then he started the actual
revolution in the state of Chihuahua. After some
time, his forces took over the city of Ciudad
Juarez across from El Paso, Texas. After
that event, General Porfirio Diaz resigned from
his presidency and moved to Paris, France. After
the elections were held, Francisco Madero was
elected president and took office about 1912.
In
February 1913,
He was assassinated. He and the Vice President.
Pino Suarez. The Vice President Pino Suarez. And
the
former Secretary of War, Victoriano Huerta, took
over the government.
Now, how did it happen that your family left
Mexico? What time was it during the revolution
that your family left? Do you want me to follow that
Mexico City events? Why don't you go ahead and tell
me when your family left Guerrero? In April 1913,
Due to the threat of the revolutionaries, we left
Guerrero in April 1913 and
crossed into Zapata, Texas. Did you all come
together? The family, just my mother and five
children. My father had gone at night with my
uncle. Well, why did your father have to leave at
night? On account of the threat of the
Revolutionary War threatening to take the town
and assassinate my uncle, Sinecio Gutierrez, who
was then the president in the city, which is like
the mayor here in the United States. So we moved to
Zapata in April, and then in August we moved to
Nuevo Laredo, Mexico. and then we could enter the
school. Then on December 1st, we moved to Laredo,
Texas, and have been living here since. Why did you
move from Nueva Laredo to Laredo? On account of the
threat of the revolution too, that they were
threatening to take over, the Carranza forces
were threatening to take the town. Of Nuevo
Laredo? Of Nuevo Laredo. Uh-huh. And your father,
had he been for the Huerta government? No, no. He
was a civilian. He was just a civilian. My uncle was
the politician. Your uncle. Well, whose side was
he on? With the Porfirio Díaz, and then the Madero
government, and then the Huerta government, they
tried to follow the line. But these were the
legitimate federal governments. Because he was
the president, he tried to follow the existing
government. And that meant that the people who
were against Huerta were after your uncle. Were
after my uncle. Right. Then from there, when we
moved to Laredo, Texas, that was in December 1913.
Then on the last day of December of 1913, the
Carranza forces attacked the city of Nuevo
Laredo. After three days of fighting, the
revolutionary forces withdrew. And then on April
14, 1914, the Huerta forces, military forces,
burned the...
government buildings, including the Kostrop's
house, bought it and left the town. Then a few days
afterward, the Carranza forces took over the
town. And then... Well, during that period, what
was one of the first things you did in Laredo? Did
you go right to school in Laredo? When we came to
Laredo in January 1914, I went to a private school
to learn English. How many years had you been to
school in Mexico? Up to and including fifth grade.
Fifth grade. That's where I learned the basic
subjects. Then from the private school, I changed
to the public school and then stayed through the
fifth grade and quit to get to work. You did? Yeah,
get to work. Life was hard at the time. So you went
through fifth grade in Mexico and then you went
through fifth grade in the United States. Well
how, what sort of work did you do? I used to work with
one of these money exchange offices that were very
popular. I was the cashier and the janitor and
earning two dollars a week. How old were you then?
Very happy because I had a job to do. Life,
everything was cheap at that time, including meat
was 9 cents a pound. Oh, how wonderful. Flour was 3
cents a pound. A loaf of bread, 5 cents. A suit of
cloth, 12, 15 dollars. A pair of shoes, 2 or 3
dollars. Life was very simple then. There were no
automobiles, just a few automobiles at that time,
1914.
You want me to mention about the exodus of people?
Yes. When we were in Nuevo Laredo, Every time there
was a threat that the revolutionary forces would
come to Nuevo Laredo, people would move to the
American side,
with all their meager belongings, and without any
hindrance from the American authorities. They
had free movement, back and forth. And things
settled down, they moved back to Nuevo Laredo. But
we made only one movement in December and stayed
here. Why did your family stay here? Do you know?
Let me tell you a story. When we came to Laredo, we
moved to that tenement house. We arrived at about
noon. That's where I saw that loaf of bread. It was a
tenement house and a loaf of bread in a garbage can.
At a tenement house? Tenement house. My goodness.
It's owned by Dr. Saffirini in downtown. Do you
know Laredo? Not that well. The rent was $7.80 a
month. We worked here about a three or four room
house. and they had a gas stove with two burners and
an oven. Well, mother prepared supper, we had
supper, we were five children, and my father,
after we had supper, my mother told me years later,
she said, when we had supper, I told Juvenal, who
was my father, she said, Juvenal, I don't know what
your plans are, But I'm not going back to Mexico
with all these conveniences. I'm not going back to
Mexico. We used to cover this mesquite charcoal
Chips and petroleum stoves. So she says, I'm not
going back to Mexico. This is the first guy's stove
she'd ever cooked up. With all these
conveniences. Very happy to have that
convenience. Well, what was your family life like
in Guerrero before the revolution? What did your
father do? Well,
she had a butcher shop first. And then he had a
saloon. But it was not quite like these saloons.
No, it was a place of reunion for the medium class
people. in Guerrero. Sort of a place for the men to
get together. It was a respectful place. Like in
many small towns in Mexico. They had a billiard,
and then a little gambling just to entertain
themselves. There was nothing else to do in
Guerrero. And your father's name now was?
Juvenal. Juvenal Gutierrez. How long had he lived
in Querétaro? My ancestors came from the city of
Querétaro many, many years ago. One of my
ancestors, an uncle, was General Bernardo
Gutiérrez de Lara. He was governor of Tamaulipas
during the independence. He went to Washington on
horseback to get aid. But he said that the price
that they asked was too high and told him, thanks,
no. And then came back. And then when the movement
of independence ended in 1925, Agustín de Turbide
became emperor. And then after a year or so, people
were discontent. They wanted a republic. So they
exiled him. And then in his absence, Mexico
enacted a law that if he ever came to Mexico, that he
would be executed. But he didn't know anything
about it. After two or three years, he came from
Spain and landed in a place between Matamoros and
Tampico. My uncle Bernardo Gutierrez was gone. He
captured that man and executed him right away. He
was the one that actually executed him? My uncle.
And then afterward, after he had landed, Mexico
issued a decree to spare his life and to send him to
Mexico City. Said that it was too late, that he was
Six feet from the ground. Oh, I had never heard that
he was later spared. He was already dead.
That's too bad. That was one uncle. Another uncle
was a priest. He surveyed lots of lands here in
these counties, and they still respect his
surveys. Oh, during this time, of course, all this
part of Texas. That was in 1910, 160 years ago.
1810. 1810, during the War of Independence.
Right, and that's when all this part of the country
was still part of Mexico. Yes, and we came from
another man. Our great-grandfather was Antonio.
And he settled down in Monterrey and then in
Guerrero. That's where we come from. My
grandfather's name was Florencio Gutierrez.
Awesome. How come so many people moved to
Guerrero? Guerrero, in about 1900, the Mexican
government issued a decree, designated a, what do
you call it, section around the, all along the
American border as a free, free, what do you call
it? Free trade. Free trade. And all those people
prospered. Guerrero was a prosperous town. They
had trade with Nuevo Laredo, with Hebronville,
with Corpus, with Matamoros, and the Rio Grande
was navigable at that time. And the people that
from Guerrero that lived in the little ranch towns
came to Guerrero to have their babies born there.
Because of the better medical facilities?
Facilities and then their loyalty to Mexicans.
They want to... Oh, you mean people from the United
States would go to Guerrero? Yes, but the Mexican
people. People who were on this side of the Rio
Grande would go there so their babies would be born
in Mexico. Because they... lived part of the time
in Herrera and then had ranches here. And that was
the custom there. This was back before the
revolution. Oh, it was in 1890. In 1890. And then
Mexico found out that it was just encouraging
smuggling because all the stores along the water
were filled up with American merchandise and it
was easy to smuggle them into Mexico. So they, what
do you call it, they canceled that. that law, and
they can never renew it again. Well then, what did
that do to Guerrero? It started to decay. It
started to decay, and this was before the
revolution? About 1900. About 1900, and so after
that there was a decline. It started to decay, and
when we left it had a population of about 4,000. And
how many had it been? How many people had lived
there, say, in 1900? The thing is, it was not so many
people. The trade, it was a trade center, trade
center, to bring the merchandise, and from there,
they smuggled it into the terrain, and now in the
interior of Mexico. At that time, the smugglers
used to cut their trade by horseback. And then at
that time, the coin was all silver pesos. They
carried it with them. But the trade was carried in
silver coins. What was the housing like then when
you were growing up? The housing? Yeah. Houses
were built to last forever. It took about two or
three years to build a house out of rock. About
three feet wide, the walls. And then the ceilings
were about three or four feet deep. And they used
them as fortresses to arrest the Indians. Was
there trouble with Indians all along? Yes, at that
time, sure. They had trouble with Indians back in
1900. So those houses were built forever. And your
family house that you grew up in, was it one of these
stone houses? All the houses were made of rock. All
the houses. Of course, the old guerrillas'
destroyed now, decayed. What happened to it?
Well, when they built the dam, it flooded the town,
half of the town, and it was abandoned and built a
new town, new Guerrero, just across from Falcón.
But all Guerrero's gone. Well, it's gone and very
few people live there. But life was very, it was
very quiet and people like commune. very
simple very simple in those days and then the
revolution came i don't have any idea what would
have happened to me there cannot be in the
revolution i could be there a patriarch with about
12 children and 40 grandchildren with a long
beard. You might be. Did your family own land? Did
your father have land? No. He didn't have any land?
No, just our house. So he was really more of a
merchant than a farmer. A merchant. Well, was he
able to get out of Mexico with anything when he fled
to Zapata? That was only because we had on, because
we moved in the horse carriage. That was my mother
and five children. So you weren't able to take
anything with you? Everything was left. How did
you get across the river? It was a total loss for us,
like a millionaire that has a half a million
council lost. We are just as bad, just as bad off as
we were because he lost everything and we lost
everything. We moved by carriage to Zapata, to the
river. There was one of those chalans, they call
it, ferry boats, but flat. They moved in with those
big sticks that the gondoliers used. They moved to
the American side. The same thing on the American
side. Well, how come you went to Zapata? Because it
was the closest place. It was the closest. Did you
have any family in Zapata? I bought a man named
Spone, who was the political chief in Zapata. He
had a store, and he very graciously gave us the
house to live there. He sold the house and he moved
to the store. And he just gave it to you? That was the
kind of man that he was. My goodness. I'll never
forget that man. He was a merchant, because he was
an acquaintance of my papa and my uncle. And he told
me, you move to our house, and we stay there one
week, and then move to the ranch. What was the name
of the ranch you moved to? San Bartolo. It was one
mile or two miles off the river. We used to walk from
the ranch to Zapata once a week to buy groceries.
Walk, just walk. What did your father do during
this period to make a living? At that time there was
a business of money exchange. He exchanged
Mexican money to American back and forth. In
Zapata? No, right here in Laredo. No, in Zapata we
did nothing. He did nothing. And then when you got
to Nueva Laredo, was he exchanging money then? We
were exchanging money. Well, so your father had
had some education too. Well, yes. Normal
education. Normal education. What would a normal
education be in Mexico in his generation? How many
years of school do you think? Six or seven years.
Six or seven. Very few people went to college. And
see, during the... people would go to France for
their education. There's much French influence
in Mexico. They prefer the French schools. So only
the very rich could afford to send their children
to France. That was that resentment in Mexico
always. And it was fake to us in school, in the tests
and everything. That resentment against the
United States. Against the United States? Sure,
because of the territory that they took. I can
never forget that. That's during the Mexican War
in 1845. In 1836, when they took
Texas first. First, right. Three years later, the
other part of... All the rest of it, all the way to
California. But there's one fact. When the
Spaniards came to Mexico, Mexico was just a piece
of land from Mexico City to Veracruz and Tampico.
That was Mexico. And the Spanish came here and took
over all this land up to San Francisco. So, in fact,
Mexico didn't have anything. They didn't lose
anything. When Mexico won the war, Spain just left
all this by default, left all these lands, and
Mexico took it. But in fact, they were not Mexican
lines, they were Spanish, Spanish lines. So
that's two sides to every question. But you did
grow up with the idea that the United States was
sort of, well, how would you describe it?
Well-grounded, land-grounded. Land-grounded.
Well, how did you feel then when you actually moved
to the United States? Did that bother you?
Different opinion. We saw the peaceful, the
freedom that we have here, and then the facilities
for education. We changed the picture. Like my
mother said, I don't want to go back to Israel. But
now, how many children were there in you? You said
there were five children. Five born in Guerrero,
five born here. Five more born here. And two
children that died in infancy. There were ten in
the family. Who was the oldest? I was the oldest.
You were the oldest. Ten years old when you left
Mexico. I was nineteen, thirteen, fourteen years
old. Fourteen years old. And then...
My father died in 1927, and then my mother died
40 years later, in 1967. She was about 89 years old,
in good health, but she was very methodical in her
life, in her diet and everything, very
methodical. Well, you said when you got here, you
went then through some more schooling. You went to
private school. Private school first to learn
English. How did your family afford to send you to
private school? Because it cost $2 or $3 a month.
Oh, it wasn't expensive. And I walked from my house
to the school. It was five blocks from there. That
was Instituto Dominguez. They have the other
business now. And then from there I moved to
central school. When you came by Matamoros, you
see a big school there. It was newly built when I
moved. When I went there, I stayed there one year
and a half. And then after the fifth day, I quit to
help the family expenses. And you went to work
exchanging money. Exchanging money. Well, when
did you meet your wife? Exchanging money and
janitor too. Everything. And cleaning hospitals
and everything. How long did you work at that job?
About a few years and then, you see, at that time
there was a big market for Mexican silver coins in
New York. And these agents would buy it and ship it
to New York. I used to do that work, count that
money, pack it, seal it, and then take it to the
space to ship it to Zimmermann and Fossey, what the
company did. broke many years ago. And then I took
those bags of money, eight or ten bags of money,
every evening to the bank for safekeeping until
the next day. And then one day the cashier of the
bank told me, I want you to come and work with us. I
told him, but I don't work with Mr. Cardenas. No, he
said, I talked to him. He said, you can work with us.
After you get through with us, you can go and work
with him. And that's the arrangement we made. I
started to work for $35 a month. And what year was
that? 1918. 1918. Well, that was a pretty good
salary in 1918, wasn't it? $30, $35. $35 a month.
And then when they started the draft here, I raised
it and it was placed in fifth class, which was
clerical work. At that time it was very important,
clerical work. So in November the work ended and I
didn't sell it. And then in the next war, in 1941, I
was 42 years old. I was married, I had four
children. So I was placed in another fifth class or
something. I never had to serve. But my boys, one of
them, he was serving the reserve. And then the
little one, the engineer, entered the Air Force in
Lackland. But he broke a knee or something, and
they told him, if we operate, we can keep to here. By
that time, he had his degree in engineering. And we
can keep, if you don't want, we'll have to
discharge it. Said, give me the discharge.
And then the other one, Carlos, was married with
three children, so they didn't touch him. They
didn't touch him. You've been lucky about that.
Yes. Well, when did you meet your wife? You said you
wouldn't have met your wife if it hadn't been for
the revolution. Because we met here. They had a
kindergarten. And my little sister was a student
there. I started to see her. And then one Labor Day,
back in 1933, we went to Monterey, my sister,
herself, to Monterey. I had a little... Chevrolet
car at that time, new car. We spent two or three days
there. And when we came back, we became engaged.
And in November, we got married. 1933. I thought we
had a very good life. How did it happen that your
wife had come to Laredo? You see, they were the
Carranza people. So long as the revolution was
going on, they were doing all right. That's her
family. They were pro-Carranza. Because his
father was with the Carranza administration. He
was a collector of... What do you call this? State
collector of taxes. No, federal collector of
taxes in Monterrey. And what was his name?
You see, you cut me there. Oh, what was his last
name? His last name. Garza. Garza. Garza. Then
when Carranza was killed, he died. He had a heart
attack in Monterrey. So the family moved to Nuevo
Laredo and opened a kindergarten. This was in
Nuevo Laredo. Nuevo Laredo, kindergarten. Then
from Nuevo Laredo, they moved to Laredo, Texas,
and got the kindergarten downtown. Then they, you
see I just, through my sister, I got to see them.
There were five sisters and she was the prettiest
one.
But you don't think they would ever have moved to
Nuevo Loreto if it hadn't been for the revolution?
No, their father had lived. It was one of those
circumstances. Just a matter of chance. Like I
say. We lost everything in the revolution, but I
gave my wife. And all three children, she raised
them like gentlemen. Very obedient. They called
us on telephone quite often, and we go and visit
them. We have a good life. We have good
daughters-in-law. You see, making allowances
for everything. We have good relations. So your
oldest son, let's see, what does he do now? He's
with the Massachusetts Insurance Company in
Houston. And his name is? Massachusetts is
Florencio Gutierrez Jr. In the last four years, he
has sold more than $1 million in insurance. My
goodness. This was the president's club. Every
year they send him to... Springfield,
Massachusetts to take courses. And then every
year they have a convention in San Francisco,
Puerto Rico, and he takes his wife with him to have a
week of fun. Oh, how wonderful. And he was an Aggie.
He was A&M. He was about three years studying
petroleum engineering. But he could not make it.
He said, Father, I cannot make it. I'm going to
quit. And then he moved to Houston. But he's a born,
born safe man. He has been doing very well. And then
your second son is Carlos. Carlos. He... went to
the University of Houston. He first went to East
Texas, I don't know. What's the name, Conroe or
East Texas? It's Nacogdoches, I think. No, that's
another town. Comer's. Comer's. Comer's. And
then he went to the University of Texas. And then,
while he was in high school, he knew this country.
My wife's sister married Mr. Adolf Kahn, who used
to be the assistant customs collector here in
Laredo. And then Mr. Kahn, his first wife died and
left him two boys and one girl. And then he married
my wife's sister. And they have a boy and a girl. And
then through that relationship we know the
Luisa's parents. We got together during forest
and everything and that's how they met. And then
they got married when he was 20 years old.
Fortunately, we had fathers on both sides. We had
to tie them up. Finally, they are on their own now.
And what does he do now? He's with the shipping
agents there called Le Parc Blanc Company. They
are shipping brokers. And he's the second man in
the office. the owner and himself, and then
personal 14 or 15 employees. And then your
youngest son is? That's engineer, civil
engineer. He started with the highway
department. And then after four years, he got his
license to be on his own. And then in Houston, he has
a big
part of the expressway that he designed in
Houston. And then he left the highway department
to be and went into partnership with a surveyor.
They stayed to work two or three years. And then he
did very well and they dissolved the partnership.
And then went to work with the Dow Company. And then
for a year or so and then he quit and now he joined
another partner. of architects. And now he's
doing very well. What is his name? Alberto.
Alberto David Gutierrez. They are living now in
Memorial Park. You know, in Houston. Yes, yes.
That's a very nice section. They're renting a
house. They have a house and they sold it. Now they
want to buy another one, but it costs too much. The
more you wait, the more it will cost you. That's
true. Well, your brothers and sisters, did they
all stay in the United States too? Yes, everyone.
One brother, he moved to Mexico City with my boss, a
man named Francisco Cárdenas. Mr. Cárdenas was
from Nuevo León, and he became governor of Nuevo
León. First he was a senator in the Congress, and
then my brother moved with him just to help him and
everything. and then he became governor of
Malayalam. And then he died in Mexico, married
there, and died in Mexico City. So there was one
that went... All the rest of them lived here in the
States. Was he one of the ones that had been born in
Mexico? Yes. He was the second in the family. So he
went back, but everybody else stayed. Well, do you
ever go back to Mexico? Do you go to Mexico to visit
much? Do you go to Mexico to visit? Yes, quite
often, every year. To Mexico City several times.
in conventions, bank conventions, and custom
brokers conventions. We have been to different
towns, to Guanajuato, Acapulco, Mazatlan,
Mexico City, Guadalajara. We have visited all
those places during the conventions. But we like
it to go just for pleasure, not to live. Well, why
wouldn't you want to live there? Because we are
used to this kind of life, quiet life. all the
freedom that we want, the freedom of expression,
and then the security in our own lives. And then the
sanitation. You go to Mexico City, you can get sick
by drinking a glass of water or a salad or
something. But do you feel like the revolution was
a good thing in the long run for Mexico? It was
justified. It cost too much in lives and property
but it had to come. Like I said, General Porfirio
Díaz maintained the country in peace, but the
country could not develop because the main
resources were in the hands of a few hands, his own
general. Then the railroads and the mines were
owned by the British and the oil companies.
American companies owned the oil companies too,
and then the The transportation was owned by
Canadians and irrigation systems by Canadians
and British. So all the main industries, basic
industries, were owned by foreigners. So it was
kept in the, what do you call it, in the undeveloped
state. They wanted to get the riches, the profits
from Mexico. So just ordinary people didn't have a
chance. That's what I say. Not to get the
opportunity for jobs. When Mexico expropriated
the oil companies, they demanded indemnity. But
in justice, the companies ought to have paid
Mexico instead of getting... Why? Because during
the revolution of Carranza, the American
companies engaged a man, Mexican general. I don't
remember what was his name. They recruited about
two or three thousand men, well equipped, well
armed and everything, to protect the oil
companies. And that happened for about five or six
years during the revolution. And that was during
the World War. So they took all the oil from Mexico.
Mexico never got a cent of revenue for that, for all
those years. They just kept that money in power
until things became stabilized. So injustice was
a good move. The oil companies had to carry a better
attitude or something. They never spent a cent for
building schools, hospitals, or anything. And
then the executives lived like kings, segregated
from the rest of the people. So those conditions
cannot last in any question. So one thing brought
the other thing. And you feel like Lázaro Cárdenas
was really justified in the expropriation. And he
should not have paid them anything. Well, you've
talked about some of these men. You were telling me
that Villa wasn't, that he was sort of a bandit.
What do you feel about Villa? That's what I say.
Pancho Villa. You know, just a bandit. The
revolution came, it was an opportunity for them
to... to wage vengeance on the other people. He
kept that fellow Luis Terrazas, that
millionaire, with him always. And he blackmailed
him, took all that he could with him. Finally he
released him. But he was just a bandit like anybody
else. And then they remember when Pancho Villa
attacked Columbus. back in 1916, out of revenge
for, it's said that the United States, President
Wilson called, double-crossed him. As a result of
that, Mexico and the United States had a treaty
that in case of an invasion from bandits, each
country had the right to invade the other country
to, in hot, for Saudi people, but with a troop,
troops not to exceed 500 men. So, American people
sent Pershing with 500 men, but before you know,
they had two or three thousand soldiers already.
And Pancho Villa used to be in the mountains
watching, watching them, looking for him. And
then they went so deep in looking for him, they went
to, to the state of Durango. Finally they had a
clash with the Mexican troops. Then finally they
recalled Pershing to make him commander of the
expeditionary forces in Europe. And finally the
United States withdrew the troops and Pancho
Villa never was caught. Now, how did you learn so
much about Mexican history? Because I was always
interested. I read papers, magazines, and
everything. So you just sort of kept up with it? I
kept up with it. I like to keep pace with history,
and then the European history, too. I remember it
was in August 1914 when they killed that, what was
the Russian general? Austrian. in Sarajevo that
started the revolution. Of course, that was a
pretext. The war had to come anyway. It was going to
come because of Germany's ambition. You see, the
ambition of Vienna was to have a line of
communication through
Constantinople. They wanted to build a railroad.
There was the alliance between Germany Italy and
Austria on one side, and then England, France and
Russia on the other side. And then when the war
came, then the United States just dashed his
ambition to dominate the world, and again in 1941.
And during that period, during World War I,
though, there were a lot of German agents in
Mexico, you were telling me. That's what I mean,
because of the resentment. So they allowed them to
operate in Mexico. You see, they had some sort of,
when the ships left the port, they would sink them
with U.S. U-boats, as they called them. So it was a
thorn on the side for the United States. And during
this period, of course, you were here in Laredo.
One thing I didn't find out, did you actually see
any battles? Did you actually see any battles when
you were growing up? Well, in Laredo, we would just
watch the shooting and everything, and the
soldiers would go to houses and see them moving
around. when they attacked Nuevo Lareo, but Nuevo
Lareo was very well fortified. They never got too
close to the... Of course at that time the
revolutionaries didn't have any guns, just
rifles. And this, the government troops, they had
cannon, cavalry, infantry. So they could not take
it. They killed about 3,000 Carrasistas and they
burned them there in the big fire.
Now it was very, very
painful for Mexico to have this revolution. And
economically it has grown. Politically it came
back to the old regime. Oh, really? Same thing.
political party that nominates all the
candidates. They call the other opposition
party. But it's only pretence to pretend that
there is democracy. Politically the same thing,
but economically it has grown. What do you think
the reason for the economic growth is? Well, the
position that it has in Mexico-Casa, the natural
resources, then the people that are being
educated.
They've got a good practice building red road
bridges. They've got so many. They're experts at
that. This bridge over here, the one on the
Mexicans, the new bridge was built by Mexicans,
designed and built by Mexicans, the pedestrian
bridge. So they are well experienced in that. Have
you traveled on the Pacific from El Paso to
Mazatlán? No, I haven't done that yet. They have a
beautiful railroad there built by Mexicans too.
So many tunnels and then canyons, big canyons.
It's a civic route from Chihuahua to Mochis. We
traveled that once. It's a beautiful city. All
built by these Indians, what do you call them?
Tarahumara Indians.
Do you think the Indians are getting more
educated?